"Using exceptions for control-flow" added (Anti-patterns documentation) (#12921)
elixir-lang/elixir: lib/elixir/pages/anti-patterns/design-anti-patterns.md

Author: I agree with the changes! Thank you.

## Using exceptions for control-flow

#### Problem

This anti-pattern refers to code that forces developers to handle exceptions for control flow. Exception handling itself does not represent an anti-pattern, but this should not be the only alternative available to developers to handle an error in client code. When developers have no freedom to decide if an error is exceptional or not, this is considered an anti-pattern.

#### Example

An example of this anti-pattern, as shown below, is when a library forces its users to use `try/1` statements to rescue raised exceptions and handle different cases. Such a library library does not allow developers to decide if an error is exceptional or not in their applications.

```elixir
defmodule MyModule do
  def janky_function(value) do
    if is_integer(value) do
      "It's an integer"
    else
      raise "expected integer, got: #{inspect(value)}"

>     end

Reviewer: I suggest finding another example, where the error is not for the developer about types. This particular case can be refactored with the guard, which provides a great error message:
```elixir
def janky_function(value) when is_integer(value) do
  "It's an integer"
end
```
so someone may think that using guards is antipattern, and it is better to use ok/error pairs.

Also, I think, it is worth highlighting that even if the function has ok/error signature, it is okay to raise exceptions if the error is about invalid usage of the function API by the developer.

Reviewer 2: One suggestion is to write a function that performs a fake HTTP call (such as `make_http_call()` and raises if the response status is not 200. That's a great use case for non-bang + bang variants. Thoughts?

Reviewer: I think fake HTTP call is a great alternative.

  end
end
```

```elixir
defmodule Client do
  # Client forced to use exceptions for control flow.
  def print_janky_function(arg) do
    try do
      result = MyModule.janky_function(arg)
      "All good! #{result}."
    rescue
      exception in RuntimeError ->
        "Uh oh! #{exception.message}."
    end
  end
end
```

```elixir
iex> Client.print_janky_function(1)
"All good! It's an integer."
iex> Client.foo("Lucas")
"Uh oh! expected integer, got: \"Lucas\""
```

#### Refactoring

> Library authors should guarantee that users are not required to use exceptions for control flow in their applications. As shown below, this can be done by refactoring `MyModule`, providing two versions of the function that forces clients to use exceptions for control flow: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Library authors should guarantee that users are not required to use exceptions for control flow in their applications. As shown below, this can be done by refactoring `MyModule`, providing two versions of the function that forces clients to use exceptions for control flow:
```

## Using exceptions for control-flow

#### Problem

This anti-pattern refers to code that forces developers to handle exceptions for control-flow. Exception handling itself does not represent an anti-pattern, but this should not be the only alternative available to developers to handle an error in client code. When developers have no freedom to decide if an error is exceptional or not, this is considered an anti-pattern.

#### Example

An example of this anti-pattern, as shown below, is when a library (for example, `MyModule`) forces its clients to use `try .. rescue` statements to capture and evaluate errors. This library does not allow developers to decide if an error is exceptional or not in their applications.

```elixir
defmodule MyModule do

>   def janky_function(value) do
>     if is_integer(value) do
>       #...
>       "Result..."
>     else
>       raise RuntimeError, message: "invalid argument. Is not integer!"
>     end
>   end

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  def janky_function(value) do
    if is_integer(value) do
      "It's an integer"
    else
      raise "expected integer, got: #{inspect(value)}"
    end
  end
```

end
```

```elixir
defmodule Client do

>   # Client forced to use exceptions for control-flow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # Client forced to use exceptions for control flow.
```

>   def foo(arg) do
>     try do
>       value = MyModule.janky_function(arg)
>       "All good! #{value}."
>     rescue
>       e in RuntimeError ->
>         reason = e.message
>         "Uh oh! #{reason}."
>     end
>   end

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  def print_janky_function(arg) do
    try do
      result = MyModule.janky_function(arg)
      "All good! #{result}."
    rescue
      exception in RuntimeError ->
        "Uh oh! #{exception.message}."
    end
  end
```

end
```

```elixir

> iex> Client.foo(1)
> "All good! Result...."
> iex> Client.foo("lucas")
> "Uh oh! invalid argument. Is not integer!."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
iex> Client.print_janky_function(1)
"All good! It's an integer."
iex> Client.foo("Lucas")
"Uh oh! expected integer, got: \"Lucas\""
```

```

#### Refactoring

> Library authors should guarantee that clients are not required to use exceptions for control-flow in their applications. As shown below, this can be done by refactoring the library `MyModule`, providing two versions of the function that forces clients to use exceptions for control-flow: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Library authors should guarantee that users are not required to use exceptions for control flow in their applications. As shown below, this can be done by refactoring `MyModule`, providing two versions of the function that forces clients to use exceptions for control flow: 
```

> 1) A version with the raised exceptions should have the same name as the smelly one, but with a trailing `!` (`janky_function!/1`);
>   
> 2) Another version, without raised exceptions, should have a name identical to the original version (`janky_function/1`) and should return the result wrapped in a tuple.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. A version that raises exceptions should have the same name as the "janky" one, but with a trailing `!` (`janky_function!/1`);
  
  2. Another version, without raised exceptions, should have a name identical to the original version (`janky_function/1`) and should return the result wrapped in a tuple.
```

```elixir
defmodule MyModule do
  def janky_function(value) do

>     if is_integer(value) do
>       #...
>       {:ok, "Result..."}
>     else
>       {:error, "invalid argument. Is not integer!"}
>     end

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    if is_integer(value) do
      {:ok, "It's an integer"}
    else
      {:error, "expected an integer, got: #{inspect(value)}"}
    end
```

  end

  def janky_function!(value) do
    case janky_function(value) do
      {:ok, result} -> result

>       {:error, message} -> raise RuntimeError, message: message

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      {:error, message} -> raise(message)
```

    end
  end
end
```

> This refactoring gives clients more freedom to decide how to proceed in the event of errors, defining what is exceptional or not in different situations. As shown next, when an error is not exceptional, clients can use specific control-flow structures, such as the `case` statement along with pattern matching.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This refactoring gives users more freedom to decide how to proceed in the event of errors, defining what is exceptional or not in different situations. As shown next, when an error is not exceptional, clients can use specific control-flow structures, such as the `case/2` statement.
```

```elixir
defmodule Client do

>   # Clients now can also choose to use control-flow structures
>   # for control-flow when an error is not exceptional.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # Users now can also choose to use control-flow structures
  # for control flow when an error is not exceptional.
```

>   def foo(arg) do
>     case MyModule.janky_function(arg) do
>       {:ok, value} -> "All good! #{value}."
>       {:error, reason} -> "Uh oh! #{reason}."
>     end
>   end

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  def print_janky_function(arg) do
    case MyModule.janky_function(arg) do
      {:ok, value} -> "All good! #{value}."
      {:error, reason} -> "Uh oh! #{reason}."
    end
  end
```

end
```

```elixir

> iex> Client.foo(1)
> "All good! Result...."
> iex> Client.foo("lucas")
> "Uh oh! invalid argument. Is not integer!."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
iex> Client.print_janky_function(1)
"All good! It's an integer."
iex> Client.print_janky_function("Lucas")
"Uh oh! expected an integer, got: \"Lucas\""
```
